welcome the spirit plant medicine
community here in Vancouver and around
the world and to the Facebook live
audience who may be watching and anybody
out there who's watching today we have a
very special guest mr. Chris Bosh is
joining us with mr. Stephen gray
Chris is gonna be one of our great
presenters at the spirit plant medicine
conference coming up here in just about
a month and a half and my name is Marc
Caron really happy to have Chris with us
and of course my co-producer and
organizer Steven gray with the
conference I'm gonna pass the Steven to
introduce Chris and his work and what
we'll be talking about Tara thank you
Mark this is going to be a very brief
introduction there's bio on the
conference website spirit plant medicine
calm if anyone wants to read more I
would just say that Chris is a retired
University professor at Youngstown Ohio
who was teaching in religious philosophy
I believe Chris yeah philosophy and
religious studies department more
relevant to what we're doing today are
more specifically relevant anyway is
that he became interested in the work of
stanislav grof who did a lot of
remarkable pioneering work in LSD
therapy and over a period of 20 years
from 1979 to 1999 undertook a remarkable
what joseph campbell would probably
truly call a hero's journey of 20 years
of 73 high-dose LSD sessions privately
with a sitter with eye coverings and
headphones on with a carefully create
curated playlists and the results of
that are truly stunning he wrote about
about it in a lot about it in his 2000
book dark night early dawn and has a
forthcoming book called diamonds from
heaven in which he actually takes the
reader through a sequential journey
through those 73 sessions if I'm correct
Chris
you know so perhaps a good way to start
as I've mentioned to you in some of our
email exchanges I've got about a million
and five questions because I delved back
into your work again watch the
transpersonal conference interview or
presentation an interview with some guy
named Ian Campbell or something like
that as well and been reading a bunch of
dark night early dawn which actually has
transcripts from those journeys in it so
but perhaps for the viewers maybe just
you could say a little bit briefly about
beyond what I said about you know
hearing about Stan graphs work what what
led you into doing this you know why you
why you well let me just frame this
first date wise and that's maybe the
most important thing to start with I
came out of graduate school in 78 and I
started this 20-year journey in 1979 and
finished it 99
so you have to take your mind back to
what was happening in 1978 Stan Grof had
just published his first book realms of
the human unconscious I had come out of
graduate school and philosophy of
religion I was an agnostic aliy an
atheistic Lee inclined agnostic I read
Stan's book and it just clicked
something deep inside me knew that I had
found my life's work I was convinced
that the people working in my field
which was philosophy of religion who
would be making the most important
contributions would be people writing
out of an experiential basis not simply
an intellectual basis so I began this
process of systematically
undertaking the inner journey to push
the limits of consciousness as far as I
could and to see what I could use learn
using this methodology that Stan had
pioneered I didn't like going outside
the law I would have much rather had
done this legally in a legally
sanctioned manner but this was after the
Controlled Substances Act was passed in
1970 the only option I had to do this
work
was to go underground to do it
secretively so I learned the method I
studied all the sources I devoured
stands next book LSD psychotherapy
always worked with the sitter worked in
a very rigorous manner and settle down
to the work I worked for four years and
then I stopped the work for six years
and then I resumed it for a very intense
ten years so it was actually 14 years of
active sessions I averaging about five
or six sessions a year during that time
yeah so you um you know where you went
with this is you know almost impossible
to conceive of for most of us I kind of
jokingly said to a couple of friends
that it made terence mckenna's
description seemed like a pleasant walk
on a Sunday afternoon - the aliens of
course self self-replicating basketball
aliens yeah but to be more serious about
it maybe the simplest way to get it
going further at this point is to just
ask you to say a little bit about
I mean I'm familiar more or less with
that you know the sort of sequence of
that journey but essentially you just
kept going deeper you you use the word
by the way universe which seems to be a
kind of a synonym for what other people
might call you know the creator or the
creators or the holy spirit or whatever
but in any case this whatever that is
the universe which was communicating to
you and taking you very aware of you
doing this as an individual and meeting
you in the same place you left off the
previous time and taking you farther
each time maybe you could talk a little
bit about how that went you know yeah
well first of all I worked in very high
dose levels I made a conscious choice
after the first three sessions to work
at what I considered to be the sort of
the maximum intensity dose level I saw
myself as simply doing an extended
course of LSD psychotherapy
there's psycholytic therapy low dose
work psychedelic therapy high dose work
and I saw myself doing a series of that
over time I realized that I was
encountering phenomena and pushing
boundaries that we're not showing up in
classical LSD psychotherapy because that
method was limited to three sessions
maximum and of course I was doing many
more than that I don't recommend really
having done this work looking back on
that I wouldn't if I were doing it again
I would do it differently I wouldn't
push the system as hard as I pushed the
system
there's price to pay along the way so I
just say that as a preface as a Tom yet
before we get started where I went
might just be easy it's just a pain
through the chapters where I tell this
story in diamonds from heaven first two
years I went through the perinatal level
of consciousness going through reliving
birth and going through many experiences
of birth and death culminating in the
complete shattering of my ego just being
turned inside out as I went into the
next stage then I went through two years
well let me back up sessions always
divide between a cleansing portion and a
in an ecstatic portion a purifying
portion and then the revelatory portion
in the cleansing portion of the next two
years I went into what an ocean of
suffering just vast
you know I'm thinking I'm jumping into
the details too quickly let me back up a
little bit sure interruption before sure
yeah you mind telling us what dosage you
were actually taking in micrograms I was
working at 500 to 600 micrograms okay
and so my question then is for our
listeners what would be the you know
when people are doing LSD in a regular
setting if we can even call it that
what's an average dose of the average
you know hard to say
be a hundred micrograms it's really hard
to say you know a microdot often is
fifty seventy-five micrograms a bladder
it really depends but it could be a
hundred and hundred and fifty something
like that basically low dose goes up to
300 micrograms usually around 200
micrograms I think many people party at
a hundred micrograms I don't know I mean
I really don't mm-hmm I don't really
have contacts in a partying psychedelic
world it's just not my world you know I
understand I just wanted to maybe kind
of get a context for the average person
would the way they relate to yeah this
is an extremely very very intense
regimen I mean it's very hard on the
body it's very challenging it really
requires kind of an explorer's
Constitution to weather it well I found
it that this dialogue opened up between
me and the universe or me and the
creative intelligence of the universe or
however you want to language it and I
think that they the caliber of the
conversation and the continuity of
conversation that just went
systematically layer by layer by layer
it's not simply a result of the drug
state or and it's not simply a result of
the consciousness that I was engaging
but I think it is importantly a result
of the seriousness and the thoroughness
with which I tried to retain complete
consciousness at all levels of the
conversation so that I was methodical in
recording the conversation getting it
written down within 24 hours after every
session and I spent a lot of time in
between sessions thinking about what had
happened trying to internalize what had
happened my experience is that the more
seriously and conscientiously we engage
these deeper states of consciousness the
more seriously and conscientiously they
engage us and then this the spiral that
I went through a series of death rebirth
processes over these years taking me
somewhat systematically rather
methodically systematically
to deeper and deeper levels of
consciousness as I said the first two
years were kind of spent in ego death
our culminating an ego death next two
years took me into a realm that I called
the ocean of suffering it took me deep
into the collective psyche of our
species
it took me into well while I write about
in dark night Lord and Dawn is a depth
of human suffering that I eventually
came to understand came to believe that
what was happening in these sessions was
not aimed at my personal healing or
transformation but it was aimed at the
healing of the collective psyche of
humanity itself that somehow in reliving
thousands and thousands of years of pain
and brutality
there was a healing taking place in
those sessions during the positive side
of those sessions for one year I went
into a state that I call deep time where
I experienced the entirety of my life
from start to finish beginning to end as
a simultaneous present and the second
year of the ocean of suffering which
actually six years later I took my break
right then I had one year of the ocean
of suffering beforehand one year after I
went into this series of experiences
deep initiation into various
cosmological processes initiations into
the universe I was given teaching an
initiation systematically into an
understanding of creation into the
processes of creation from there I after
that culminated in after two years I
went into what I came to view as
archetypal reality I spent about a year
and a half exploring different
dimensions of archetypal reality being
drawn into vast dimensions of collective
consciousness and some of the workings
of the collective psyche I began to have
experiences of reincarnation not as an
individual but as a species the entire
species reincarnating generation by
generation and what that was about and
the intelligence there after those I
went for another year
so deep into what Stan calls calls a
reality non-dual consciousness Shunyata
emptiness began to enter into the primal
void and then that took me about 15
years in and I still had five more years
on the journey and in the last five
years of the journey I went into many
levels of experience but basically an
encounter with what I call the diamond
luminosity my understanding of this is
this is what the Buddhists called
dharmakaya it is the domain of light
that lies outside samsara it is the
crystalline clear light out of which all
physical existence emerges and so I was
taken into that reality over 26 sessions
I entered that reality only four times
the tears in between those four entries
which came about once a year I went
through it and this was always happening
very very intense rigorous purification
processes because states of
consciousness the deeper you go the
purer of the state of consciousness to
stabilize consciousness at these higher
levels you have to purify your entire
physical psychological system to be able
to maintain coherent consciousness at
these levels if you just glanced into
them that's one thing but if you want to
hold awareness for hours at a time
stabili in these states of consciousness
your system has to be purified in order
to maintain coherent cognition there I
was just gonna ask you about that
actually it's one of the questions I had
written down for myself actually took a
quote out of dark night that says you
have to train yourself in order to
maintain coherent cognition in these
radical states of consciousness and then
you also use the term you have to learn
to learn you learn how to learn so I'm
always thinking about you know the
people who are watching this in case
there is any person brave enough and
perhaps foolhardy enough to and take
undertake a somewhat similar process can
is there something important you could
say to the
person or those people about you know
how they need to learn how to maintain
that coherent cognition and learn to
learn as they would go you know into a
continuing or an ongoing process like
this I can and I will but first some
preliminaries 1k never work alone always
be working and you know do your homework
do the reading read the books understand
what you're getting into never work
alone always have an experienced sitter
not a guide necessarily but a sitter
preferably one well it really has to be
someone who knows the ropes who has
entered these states of consciousness
because you're going into territory that
is so foreign that people who are not
familiar with this territory can get can
easily get frightened and intimidated by
what it's coming at them you need
someone who can help you stay grounded
and help you find the courage to face
whatever darkness may arise in those
conditions in terms of I mean once you
take care of safety once you've curated
the playlist once you have an agreed
upon arrangement with your sitter once
you have created all the conditions of
containment that allow for these states
to be engaged safely once you have the
rules of conduct established so to speak
then it's a matter of finding within
yourself the trust and the capacity to
go wherever your consciousness or
wherever the session wants you to go
wherever it wants to take you and it'll
take you into excruciating pain and one
at different times and one of the things
I learned from Stan Grof and I keep I
absorbed from his writing is a trust in
the process that if you surrender
completely and let the process take you
wherever it wants to go it will take you
through potentially excruciating
dynamics and it may break you
but in that breaking in that surrender
and dying process
it will also heal you and it will bring
you alive in new ways that you ways you
had not been alive before so it's trust
it's couraged it's seeing things through
all the way down to the bottom every
session it's really important that every
session be taken as far as it can
possibly go so that you don't leave
unfinished business behind you
usually when you reach a peak and you go
through a death rebirth process you go
through the remainder of the session
into some positive ecstatic state and
then the system will calm down the next
session you'll resume into the wherever
you stopped the cleansing if you hold it
long enough eventually this will reach a
peak and then you go through into the
ecstatic state again so one of the
things you're sorry chorion yeah yeah
well things you've spoken about in dark
night is that you know I think the
universal primal fear for human beings
is the fear of what Buddhists would call
non-existence of the individual selves
right so I found it to be quite
instructive in in dark night that you
pointed out that while whatever that
illusory self is dies individuality
doesn't there's a different kind of
individuality somehow that arises out of
that you know I'm always thinking of
like the people that are watching this
the kind of people who will come to the
conference what they what they can learn
about this because I think perhaps some
reassurance about that may be helpful
you know especially for medicine people
right yeah well you know in the vedantic
tradition the individual in solution so
the goal is you destroy the individual
you destroy ego you die and then you
dissolve into the infinite and that's
not it well that's a you know a
widespread and deeply-held set of
convictions that I don't share that
conviction my experience is that the
form of our life can die
everything that we know ourselves to be
and everything we've ever known may die
when may completely be shattered and
just completely die but in that process
you then are reborn you wake up in a new
world in a new context an ass a new
being and if you go through this process
multiple times you begin to realize that
the form of your life is repeatedly
dying at deeper and deeper levels but
the essence of your life is
indestructible
the ego Chris Bosh is destructible you
know if that's a temporary form but the
essence underneath that is
indestructible and there is as these
superficial layers of our being perish
and fall away there is a there is a
liberation and a freeing of a deeper
form of individuality and I think this
is a developmental process is taking
place in reincarnation just just we die
and then we're reborn we die we're
reborn there is emerging in that process
a a germinal seed that is individual but
not isolated individual but open to life
on all sides maybe I can just but make
so many questions Chris maybe I can get
about six questions into one somehow or
does it it all has to do with a central
element of your work perhaps the central
element in terms of other people that
you're speaking to is that on several
levels there's this individual ego death
and rebirth process there's the
collective ego death and rebirth process
and in that vein there's you've been
shown by this creative intelligence the
universe that several things one that
we're probably maybe even certainly you
could correct me on this approaching a
imminent economic and environmental
collapse and and secondly that that
actually has to happen
because of the need for the great death
as you've called it before the Great
Awakening and then the one that they
want to kind of squeeze into that
question as well as given that I don't
think very many people are going to do
the kind of deep deep extended work that
you did for this essential consciousness
revolution to actually manifest I'm
wondering if there's things that you
could you can think of or guidance that
you could think of for people that are
interested in working with psychedelics
but not at that level I mean you know
ways that others could approach this
yeah I hope not many people would choose
to work in the way that I did or at the
level that I did and I wouldn't do it
that way again myself if I were doing it
from scratch I think we are continuously
in dialogue with an infinite
intelligence we right now you and I are
existing in our bodies but our
consciousness is in intimate rapport
with an infinite consciousness when we
take a psychedelic of any form and we
take a medicine we hypersensitive our
system and a system begins to go through
a spontaneous purification process and
we begin to have to face things that
would rather not face we begin to have
to look at things that often would
rather not look at and we have to
remember things that many of us would
rather not remember this is the universe
healing us this is how the universe
helps us become whole helps us heal the
fissures which have gotten embedded in
our particular system in that process of
healing the body and healing
consciousness and healing the soul
healing the former life trauma that we
all carry in that process we not only
removed negativity from the system and
heal the system but we also open the
system to new levels of intimacy with
the universe itself so we awaken
capacities we awaken emotional capacity
we awaken intellectual and spiritual
capacities within the organism everybody
has to find their own modulation of this
dialogue of this dance whether or not I
think this is happening continuously
even if you never take a psychedelic
we're constantly living we're making
choices we're living in dialog with the
universe it's just it's a process that's
moving very slowly reincarnation is a
very finely tuned system but it moves
very slowly when we begin a spiritual
practice whether it's meditation or yoga
or trance dancing or psychedelics we
accelerate that process as we accelerate
the process it not only gets deeper but
it gets larger so that we enter into
deeper rapport with the universe and we
also enter into larger rapport with the
universe so people often begin to be
touched by our so-called private work
one of the things I learned in this
process is there is no such thing as a
private spiritual practice there is no
such thing as private healing whenever
we heal deeply the individual we always
touch the lives of people that we
acquire me connect chemically connected
to whether we ever meet them in the
physical body or not and then if you if
you have a I think if you have a deep
heart if you have a deep felt commitment
to other people and to animals and just
to the planet when given the opportunity
to do something constructive on behalf
of other people I think most people
would say yes I'll help you no I'll
undertake that show me what I can do
this is what happened with me in the
ocean of suffering it what happened in
all the work when your individual
consciousness shatters you don't
spontaneously pop into oneness I mean
some people do and but you pop into a
larger field of consciousness you move
into the consciousness of your species
you move into perhaps the
Christmas of birth you move into the
consciousness of other life-forms when I
moved into the consciousness of my
species I experienced my species as a
living organism and I experienced my
species on a developmental trajectory
and I experienced over and over again in
a way that I was completely unprepared
for caught completely by surprise I was
not at all really well versed in the
global systems crisis but over and over
again I was shown that humanity is
coming into a critical hour in its
destiny a critical bifurcation point in
its evolutionary process and that we
were poised on the edge of a profound
psycho spiritual awakening just a
profound before and after point in human
history something that would be marked
by well it would be used as a marker in
history for the turning point in
humanity the proportions of this are
hard to estimate but and so there was a
particular session I called the great
awakening which took me deep into this
awakening of the entire human species
and I don't know when I don't know how
you know it's not like I getting details
on those but the the certainty of the
conviction that humanity is moving in
this direction that we're going there
was very very strong and for their just
as in mystical traditions for a person
to achieve spiritual awakening oneness
with God or there must first take place
the dark night of the soul the
tremendous purification the emptying of
all the old habits the emptying of
everything that keeps us small in order
to allow us to open into that which is
large
likewise for Humanity if humanity is
going to go through a profound spiritual
awakening there must take place a a dark
night of the soul for the entire species
what I call the great death there must
be a cleansing of all of the choices
that humanity has made which have kept
it
fragmented which have kept it small you
know the choice is against race the
choice is against religion the choice is
a class all the ways we've divided and
carved up the planet
what a lots of questions about that but
here's one of them excuse me
you know this in terms of this great
great death and great you know rebirth
or reawakening of the species you know
you know we we know that as people lose
their ground of their sort of known
world becomes unstable I'm not talking
about the Seekers now I'm just talking
about you know the regular folk in in a
country or whatever yes there's a crack
that could open up for a potential
rebirth but it seems to me also that is
a recipe potentially for a very
dystopian scenario and you know with the
sort of you know I guess an old Hitler
would be a classic example where his you
know his people got got treated like
[__] after World War one mark went nuts
there was all kinds of stability and
Hitler you know as a psychopath or
whatever and fascist took advantage of
that so I'm wondering like you know if
we are increasingly you know falling
into economic and environmental collapse
the instability and fear that that could
generate could they not go the opposite
way
I mean what is the universe telling you
about that it can go the opposite way
we are coming entering frightening times
and hard times I think the global I
think there's a a global systems crisis
that is fermenting which is being driven
first by ecological forces and then by a
series of historical and economic forces
I think if what I'm seeing is correct
we're entering a time of deconstruction
the time when the normal assumptions of
life are going to be stripped from us
we're going to lose control of more and
more of our lives
and when that happened when that has
happened historically when it happens in
the lives of individual it doesn't
always produce a beautiful being at the
end it often produces that sometimes you
can produce this very ugly results and
very destructive regressive
us-against-them at this point I think
we're going to have to choose as a
people individually and as a people and
as a species as we get into this crisis
we're going to have to make a choice
over and over again we're going to have
to make a series of choices we're going
to have to choose on the basis of ego
meaning on the basis of our individual
private experience of what serves our
individual private good or what serves a
larger collective good what serves the
good of the Commons if we choose
inclusive solutions to the crises that
are coming then I think we will make an
accelerated pivot into an unbelievable
positive future if we make regressive
sulit choices if we choose a narrow
option if we choose only what's good for
us and our kind and us in a narrow sense
I think we'll probably go extinct
because you basically can't run this
planet on the basis of the ego and have
nuclear weapons and biological weapons
destructive capacity without there being
catastrophic consequences I think it's
the the pressure of extinction which is
actually an extraordinarily powerful
evolutionary driver which is will be
pushing us I think to make better
choices in the future than we've made in
the past I don't think this is like any
a magical process where you know spirits
gonna take over and the Holy Spirit's
going to occur and something's going to
happen to save us from ourselves it's
not about saving us from ourselves
it's about growing up it's about taking
responsibility for ourselves in history
and one way of thinking about it is it's
about living from our soul because the
soul knows that we are more than this
body the soul knows that we have web of
relationships the soul knows that the
that we leave is the earth were coming
back to the soul has a depth and a
perspective but we we have built a
civilization based largely upon the egos
perspective private self private me and
mine we are in the process of outgrowing
that I think we're in the process of
growing into the experience of the soul
on earth our soul consciousness which
most people only experience when they're
in between lives in the Bardo is
actually waking up inside historical
existence but if that's not an easy
process that's a birth process but what
my sessions show me what they tell me is
that we will make it there's no
guarantee you know an evolutionary
process and there are no guarantees in
evolution but where I have been what I
have seen in my journeys through deep
time is that we do make it and what's
emerging on our planet is an
extraordinary being just the next
generation or the next form of humanity
what I call the future human is just
it's it's just an extraordinary being we
are in the process of birthing this
being into history
it's like as a species we are a woman
going into labor we're beginning to get
into the real thick of it where things
really begin to fall apart imagine if we
didn't know we were pregnant imagine if
we didn't know what we were doing if we
were giving birth we are in the process
of giving birth I don't think we you
can't stay in labor too long it's
dangerous for the mother and child
likewise the planet is not going to be
able to stay in labor too long it's
going to drive us to to precipitous and
rapid choices moving critical choices if
we make those choices well if we do a
good job with this process I think it
will usher a completely different era in
human history that's beautifully said
and and in spite of the terror
[__] possibilities incredibly
positive because it shows us that there
is you know something you know that's
available to the species and to all
human beings so from there that almost
seems like hard to come back to you know
somewhat more prosaic or specifics
however you've made reference to
reincarnation and versions thereof
little in this in this conversation and
I know you made a study of it you wrote
a book about it
and you've had some very interesting
thoughts about it I'm curious I'm
curious about a couple things here one
of them kind of hits a little trigger
point in me and but so sort of sort of a
two or three part question here one is I
you know I think would be really
instructive for people to hear you talk
a little about your understanding of
incarnation because you also talk about
beyond incarnation and stuff but with
within that there I have something kind
of specific that I've sort of wondered
about and I'm gonna read you a quote
from your book hmm okay if our
experience in this life is convoluted
and torn by conflicting forces
it was transparently obvious it was in
other words it was shown to you that
this is caused by the carryover of
exercises from other space time
encounters dot dot dot what we are is
the result of everything we have ever
thought so
the thing that I'm wondering that you
could clarify a little unknot one is I
think a lot of people would hear that as
somehow they're guilty or at fault or to
blame for everything that they're
experiencing now and what I wonder but I
understand the principle of what you're
saying but if you're right now living in
I don't know say Bangladesh and you know
there's just been another one of those
floods or something like that you're a
good-hearted person you're trying to
make a good life for your family do you
have some culpability or responsibility
for being in that situation in the
external as well yeah you do no no I
[Laughter]
okay yeah you know I want to step back
just for a moment I feel guilty you know
we kind of we're jumping into really
really heavy topics or jumping into you
know psychedelics and deep states of
consciousness and the future of humanity
and you know really and we're about to
jump into reincarnation these are all
very substantive and deserving issues
that need to be taken time they need to
be unfolded carefully and gradually when
I when I teach a taught a course in my
university called transpersonal studies
I spent a third of the semester five
weeks just looking at the evidence for
rebirth okay it says it takes time to
really unpack all the components and all
the nuances and I think likewise for
reincarnation to bring it here
reincarnation is one of the oldest
philosophies on the planet and it has
kept company with many primitive beliefs
which I don't think are really deserving
there are different theories of
reincarnation different sophistications
around our understanding of
reincarnation but the key is simply this
we are a learning system we learn by
challenging ourselves we enter
conditions we make choices we inherit
the consequences of those choices we
internalize those and eventually we die
and this learning continues the into the
soul gathers its knowledge the species
gathers its knowledge generation by
generation we plunge back into the
process we keep this process going we
keep it trying we keep exploring we keep
pushing ourselves and as we go through
this process we activate potentials that
are latent within us classically in the
hindu system we activate the chakras we
move through from the first all the way
up to the seventh chakra of oneness
when we when we incarnate classically
our story of reincarnation has been a
story that's focused on individual karma
the end of evolution of the individual I
think we've overly personalized karma
with overly personalized reincarnation
it's not that that's not a true story
that is a true story the soul is making
choices the soul is growing but there's
another dynamic that's taking place and
that is there's a collective dynamic of
reincarnation there's an evolutionary
dynamic of reincarnation and what the
individual can accomplish is always
tempered by or influenced what the
species is able to accomplish what is
going on in the species there is one of
the hardest things for all of us in any
philosophical system or any religious or
spiritual system to address or to
understand is suffering just seemingly
gratuitous painful suffering of natural
causes and diseases and the things the
terrible things we do to each other I
don't think there's a simple formula for
understanding any of these things there
they're different perspectives that give
us different perspectives on how things
on what levels we want to address this
question act I think we choose generally
the evidence from a number of sources
suggests that we choose where we
incarnate we choose who we incarnate
with we choose incarnated and conditions
that can be debilitating ly painful and
if there is an intelligence to the
system if there is a fundamental
intelligence to the reincarnation
process there is an intelligence
expressing itself even circumstances of
such such profound suffering that we
can't make sense of it we can't
understand why anyone would choose to
submit themselves to that kind of ordeal
and yet
if we can find meaning in certain
context if we can take people into deep
states of consciousness and uncover
their individual history and find
meaningful connection between their
former lives then I think we have
grounds for thinking that there is
meaning taking place even in those
circumstances where we can't necessarily
understand it when you're trying to
understand individual suffering there's
a set of issues and dynamics that we
look at but if we're trying to
understand collective suffering we're
trying to understand the suffering that
touches hundreds of thousands millions
of people's lives all at the same time
generational suffering we have to bring
in a dip a larger picture a larger
apparatus to me reincarnation is the
higher octave of evolution in evolution
the creative intelligence the universe
is folding collective learning forward
through the evolving of the whole
species through reincarnation the
creative intelligence of the universe is
folding individual learning forward but
individual learning and collective
learning are all intertwined because the
individual is a human being and the
human being is a species at a certain
stage of its evolution so as the
individual grows the species is growing
I think our entire species is going to a
point or if it's that this is what's
hard because it is such a long
discussion there are so many stages I
feel really guilty trying to take the
shortcuts that I'm trying to get to
extract an answer in a matter of five
minutes and when it's really it's it's a
long process people are going to have to
dive into your work more and one of
those ways of course is going to be to
come to the conference and post
conference talk you're going to give
called the birth of the future human so
maybe I cannot throw it
that's this is going to be the first
time I've given a public lecture
completely dedicated to that topic the
birth of the future human I've written
about it I wrote about it and dark night
early dawn I write about it and diamonds
from heaven but I've not really tried to
publicly speak about this along so
that's I'm really working hard to
prepare that presentation one thing I'd
like to say Chris is I I think it's
great material just based on your
experience that a lot of people haven't
experienced and and the questions really
come around and I really respect you
know the you know what you want to bring
to your answers because I understand
that they're not you know quick and
something that can just be answered in a
sentence or two what I do really
appreciate is you know the curiosity and
the inspiration and the questions that
evens come through my mind just
listening because I'm an on what you're
talking about nest even says a million
questions at all you know I've got a
million two we're the same yeah but it's
you know what I love about this
conversation is that it gets people
curious to ask more questions to look
deeper into their own consciousness and
and you know you know how they choose to
then expand that as well because you
know your experience is just one of many
different ways people here use plant
medicines and different attributes to
enhance and expand their consciousness
yeah and it's obvious that the work
you've done you certainly went on a
hero's journey like 73 times and I just
admire I admire that work because like
we said before we just got on you know
very very brave and courageous for the
work that you did to find the answers
and the insights that you did so I thank
you for that and I also want to thank
you just for wanting to give the answers
to the questions you know that level of
intellectual
meat potatoes I guess yeah it would the
answer you know
that almost sounds like an ending let's
not stop there what what I've learned is
in studying all the literature that I
studied in order to write life cycles
the book on reincarnation and out of the
session says the circumstances in which
we find ourselves have significance they
have meaning they're not accidental
they're not random they have meaning
some of that meaning is individual some
of that meaning is collective but how we
respond to the circumstances in which we
find ourselves how we allow it to change
us how we allow us how we make ourselves
better human beings in responding to
those circumstances how we learn
that's the vital thing we may not
understand why things are the way they
are but as we respond completely in
heart and mind to our circumstances we
change as we change we grow when we look
at our lives through multiple iterations
and even generations we're growing we're
changing the spacious is growing and
changing the planet is growing and
changing and we're all hardwired into
each other it's so amazing isn't it yeah
yeah yeah so I got a few more questions
I'd like to fire at you there another
some more these are like like oh god how
do I get you know all my curiosity into
one or two simple kind of things this
one has to do with you know it's
impossible so this one has more to do
with what you what you might call or has
been called you know non embodied
intelligences you've talked about the
universe in the general sense you never
I don't recall you ever saying that
you'd encountered anything in particular
that presented itself in some sort of
visual form as an entity or a being or
anything like that but certainly lots of
people were the medicines these days
talk about that with ayahuasca and so on
that yeah that's part of the question
what you would say about that and a
another component of that sort of same
area of curiosity for me is I was
involved in the Native American church
peyote ceremonies for about a dozen
years and those people very passionately
not only believed but claimed that
there's a there's a power in prayer in
especially a group intention all being
focused together but they they claimed
that that you know when you put out a
prayer that sincere comes from the heart
and perhaps amplified by a medicine like
that yet you are indeed that prayer is
indeed capable of change in the material
realm so I'm wondering you know if you
thought much about that and then just
this general sense of you know how
intelligence you know can manifest or
present itself you know on outside of
our human even to the point of like is
the earth a being is the earth and
intelligent being anyway whatever you
can do with that yeah please please do
yeah well and I'd say yes and yes I mean
okay thanks I think intention is
powerful a collective intention is
powerful focused intention amplified
intention is powerful it influences our
body it influences circumstances around
us it influences other people so I'm
really comfortable with that I think
David Nichols written a book called
subtle activism where he's talking about
these you know he's one of people who
organizes global meditations focused so
we're gathering hundreds of thousands of
people in meditational exercises
basically integrating their
consciousness into prayerful exercise
guru yoga in the Buddhist and other
traditions where they're are focusing
all the disciples from all over the
world all the students of a particular
teacher doing a particular practice on a
particular day at a particular time I
think these have these are very very
powerful and focused exercises
my sense is that the spiritual universe
is a highly populated world I mean it's
just we tend to like to see I mean
imagine if for every physical life-form
there were spiritual life forms for
every level of physical life form there
were levels of spiritual life forms
certainly the the sacred medicine
tradition is when we take these various
herbs and substances and peyote and
mushrooms that we encounter these living
life forms at different levels we
encounter them and we find much to our
surprise they're interested in us and
they're willing to help us and they're
willing to work with us I'm really
comfortable with that I mean I've
experienced enough ayahuasca enough
psilocybin mushroom sessions and have
encountered you know the living some of
the living entities of the universe in
my LSD work this is a particular
medicine that has particular
characteristics so I want to be careful
that that's my primary medicine work
I've done other work but my primary
philosophical work has been the LSD work
and LSD tends to be first of all it
doesn't have many historical fields
associated with it you know peyote has
been being used for thousands of years
ayahuasca has been used for thousands of
years so there are fields associated
with these medicines LSD is a new
medicine doesn't have a lot of fields
associated with it it also tends to be a
high-altitude medicine so it tends to
blow into the cosmological ceiling it's
not a it's not like my mushrooms or
ayahuasca which tends to work at a
certain level of spiritual reality it
tends to push into kind of the
cosmological level so it also tends to
just grind the ego up finest dust and my
sense is that it's kind of like you have
to be a being to encounter beings and if
you're not a being you don't tend to
encounter as many beings it's not that
those beings aren't there but
you kind of our presence evokes the
conversation or it evokes the
experiences that we have from the
infinite potential of consciousness it
in my experience in working with LSD
when I died at lower levels
I don't simply become a conscious chris
bosh having interesting transpersonal
experiences i ceased to be chris bosh
except with continuity of memory i have
continuity of memory with Chris but I
become different kinds of being and in
my case I enter different strata of
consciousness so it's kind of like if
you were looking at atmosphere you enter
different layers of the atmosphere of a
planet I just dissolve into patterns of
consciousness which are not individual
but they tend to be very large and very
wide not all different medicines tune us
to the infinite potential of
consciousness in different ways peyote
chose us in a certain way mushrooms
tuned us in a certain way we have it's
not like it's all covering the same
highway we have different roads into the
landscape and different experiences but
my I'm convinced that the entire
spiritual landscape is hyper
consciousness hyper aware and is
populated the things you know that what
you were talking about with you know LSD
having its particular characteristic of
kind of blasting you out into the cosmos
so to speak high altitude and all that
in your talk at that transpersonal
conference this is something that I've
been quite curious about and I'll try to
explain and turn it into a question is
that you said that it was at some point
became very difficult to come back after
the end of this 20-year journey then you
really missed that and that a certain
point you were quite confessional about
it said you actually felt like you were
waiting to die that you know there's
kind of a I don't know maybe a flatness
or something about existence here so so
the where I'm going with this as a
question is
you know I guess I'd have to confess at
a much more kindergarten level of
experience in these realms my assumption
or you know I guess a predilection it's
been quite influenced by Buddhist
teacher that I worked with for quite a
long time you might have heard of
chgyam trungpa yeah well a lot of
chumki Rinpoche's teachings were focused
on you know this precious human birth
and how we in a sense revel in it you
know that you know he would use things
like learning how to appreciate the
redness of red and the blueness of blue
you know and he said that in life mentor
I don't know if he I'm not quoting him
word by earlier but something effective
you know wisdom or enlightenment is as
much about learning how to make a proper
cup of tea as anything else you know
that that you know we're given this an
amazing gift of this particular you know
constellation of you know energies or
whatever densities and all that with
this amazing ability to appreciate this
you know through our senses and our you
know our music and you know our
everything right so I'm I'm wondering
you know why that seems so flat he when
you came back from his process yeah good
question well formulated you know I got
into this work for a number of reasons
but certainly you know I was interested
in enlightenment I've been meditating
for a number of years I'd encountered
the kind of blocks that usually show up
in the first years of practice and I
thought that if I did some LSD sessions
I could break through these blocks and
exposed my own foibles and and I would
wake up sooner I would kind of
accelerate my own enlightenment what I
found was that working in the particular
modality that I did very high doses like
it it took me so far that I began to
realize that a lot of my experiences
that were happening first of all we're
not concerning me personally but they
were larger than me and they were there
was something deeper going on than in
Lichtman enlightenment is a perfectly
acceptable and wonderful focus for one's
life but what was happening in my
sessions was something different at the
end it curved back around toward the
Enlightenment tradition but it was
something different it was it was a
process of exploring the cosmos so there
is the Enlightenment project or
spiritual development and then simply
exploring the common the cosmos going
deeper and deeper into the cosmos itself
what happened for me is that in the last
five years of this work when I went into
the diamond luminosity work when I went
I dissolved so deeply into that light
into that into the body of God you might
say into the the Dharmakaya after doing
that that particular face of the work
for five years I came to a point where I
knew I had to stop and I had to stop for
a couple of reasons one is because my
system was running so hot it was just
running so hot it was always
uncomfortable I was having some subtle
energy issues
I was overheating my system essentially
but the main reason I stopped was that I
could not bear the heartache of coming
back
so I had dissolved so intimately into
the divine that when I came back there
was such a sense of withdrawal and such
a sense of loss that I I just couldn't
keep going out into it and coming back
now ideally of course one wants to open
up to that kind of intimacy in a way
that you don't have to come back from
you want to open up into oneness with
divine or experiencing the divine
luminosity in a way that you can sustain
in your physical consciousness that is
the spiritual ideal in the way working
with psychedelics particularly the way
that I work with them this is a path of
temporary immersion it temporarily opens
you to the universe and then you come
back and temporarily open
back and I drove myself so deep into the
universe that eventually when I stopped
my work when I stopped my work I thought
I was just going to be able to stop and
process and enjoy the many gifts that I
had been given but after I stopped I
found myself entering a deep and
profound sadness and that's why it's not
just a hero's journey it is I understand
that but it's also the story of the
wounded hero it's someone who was
wounded deeply by the sheer beauty of
what he/she discovered so I found it
when I did come back when I began to
stop my sessions when I did stop my
sessions I found that I was so I was
missing the communion with the divine so
deeply that I really was just waiting to
die I was waiting to wrap up my life I
was taking care of my children my family
and I was teaching and doing things but
this life had become flat and it's I
knew that the physical world was the
body of the divine I knew that them that
that it was the manifestation of the
creative intelligence of the universe it
was the divine in manifest form I knew
that the limitations were all mine what
I had done in all this the way I did the
work I lost the balance there's a
balance between transcendence and
eminence there's the transcendent divine
and the imminent divine I had pushed
myself so deeply in the path of
transcendence that I had lost my
foothold in the imminent divine so it
was it's a balancing act between opening
up to the totality of all that is in all
of its dimensions and all of its levels
and then grounding in the present body
in the present day in the present life
in your present form I got those out of
balance I mean it took years of work
just sort of commit myself to reground
myself
the here and now as I was s I am for the
remainder of my life that's why for
among other reasons that's one of the
reasons I wouldn't encourage people to
do what I did it's funny it's a tricky
thing a little bit of transcendence is a
very good thing it can heal us it can
show us who we are it can help us
understand what's going on in life it
can activate very positive dimensions of
our being but if you plunge yourself too
deeply into transcendence you can lose
your footing in the here and now and the
the blessings of the here and now are
equally important blessings to the
blessings of transcendence this physical
world is a sacred special place and I
think enlightenment is an attempt to
awaken into to become transparent to the
totality but in a way that keeps your
feet solidly planted on the earth do you
think you would have been able to come
back with the same kind of
incontrovertible understandings and
insights had you not you know done it
that intensively you know the path not
taken so my passion then is you know one
thing we see a real need for within our
community is the need for the
integration after doing this kind of
work yeah and then which leads to the
question is how did you then adjust to
transform yourself so that you're just
kind of waiting to die how did you get
that joy for this life back
I think integration is the merging one
of the very powerful emerging themes in
the psychedelic community and it's
really really important it's been under
undervalued and under stated I mean as
long as we're staying close to
conventional reality and we're healing
the personal psyche I think when we have
medical models for what integration
healthy integration looks like
and if we go deeper to experience the
intelligence that runs through all
things and the continuity of life after
death
we still have spiritual models that help
us understand and integrate those
experiences into aid into a well lived
life but when you go farther than that
when you go deeper than that when you go
beyond physical space-time reality when
you plunge deep into the universe then I
think integration becomes a more
fundamental question and frankly I've
spent a year writing just the last
chapter of diamonds from heaven which is
the chapter of coming off the mountain
it's the chapter on integration in order
to kind of reground to myself I I grab
my life and I recommitted myself to
being on this earth I renewed my
contemplative practice I deepened my
contemplative practice I renewed my
commitment to the body I'm a dude my
commitment to relationships but the
other thing I found was the sadness of
leaving the communion with the divine
was exacerbated by the silence that my
society forced upon me because of its
prohibitions around psychedelics I
wasn't allowed to talk about my
experiences I'm a teacher I want to
discover and want to share I wasn't
allowed to share my experiences I had to
keep quiet I wasn't allowed to talk to
my students I wasn't allowed to talk to
my colleagues about this work I wasn't I
did his work as a philosopher but I was
not being allowed to function as a
philosopher and what I found was there's
a section in the chapter I called the
sickness of silence integration is not
simply a psychological process it's a
social process and socially I was not
allowed to integrate my experiences into
my life I had split myself in half and
it was really writing diamonds from
heaven first writing dark night early
dawn and then writing diamonds
heaven where I began to put together the
two halves of my life I began to put
together my psychedelic half and my
professorial you know physical half and
it really began to speaking clearly and
powerfully about my experiences and
writing about them that I've begun to
feel myself more grounded on the earth
in a way that I had not felt in years
prior so part of it is integration we
bring the experiences back and being
willing to share them and talk about
them and engage people around them
excellent yeah so people are going to
depart ourselves and one other question
was then I'll slip my mind Stephen go
ahead that's good well I think you know
people have taken in so much if they're
watching this that at this point they're
probably gonna go have to pour
themselves a whiskey anyway us to calm
down a little you know you know in
Kansas anymore now so perhaps just to
kind of end on a you know an uplifting
note so to speak you know you talked
about how you know we can do it we will
do it in a sense and you know that we
have choices but you know let's assume
that that the process works out in the
best way that can the journey for the
species over the next whatever it is
several decades or so and we are able to
you know go through that consciousness
revolution and so on maybe just you
could sum up with a little bit what does
the future human look like
first we've been building the future
human for tens of thousands of years
we've been building it with every
incarnation a repetitive cycle we've
been building it we've been activating
the form that this human being is we've
been learning it stretching it teaching
it growing it lifetime by lifetime
lifetime by lifetime I think where we're
going what's going to be happening is
all of our former lives are coming
together as we become more coherent as
we could become more integrated all of
these lives come together the way I
experienced it in the session was I
experienced one session where all my
former lives began to come together like
wrapping string around a kite spool and
at a certain point they fused there was
an explosion of energy and they fused
and when they fused this diamond light
broke out of my chest and threw me into
a completely different state of
consciousness I cook it was individual
but it was a a form of individual
consciousness that was beyond anything
that I had ever experienced before and
it wasn't simply the sum of the
individual lives
that all of those lives had been
actualized in a higher form of
evolutionary expression
I think the future human what I touched
there was my own personal version of the
future human that is evolving in
evolution we have to picture a species
where we have healed all the pains of
history where we've healed all the
divisions against each other and against
our own body and against our own soul
where we have opened our heart to all
not only all human beings but all
life-forms where our mind is in
conscious communion more conscious and
open communion with the intelligence of
the universe
as I in one of the very last sessions it
was one of the most difficult sessions I
ever went through I went through a huge
trip down was taken far into the future
deeper into deep time than I'd ever been
and one of the gems of that session was
to actually experience the archetypal
form of the future human what we are in
the process of becoming and truly I mean
it's like a you hear it said we're
becoming a planet of Buddhas a planet of
Christ a planet of prophets we're
becoming the picture the highest levels
of spiritual realization that we have
known in history individuals have
accomplished and picture the entire
species operating at that level what
kind of species would we be when the
entire species is is enlightened when
the entire species is uplifted
spiritually and emotionally and
psychologically that's what we're in the
process of becoming once we have once we
have activated that deep level of our
own being collectively then we can
really begin to cook then we can really
begin to do something exciting on the
planet off the planet into the galaxy
I mean intelligence that created this
universe thinks on a scale that just
still boggles our mind and I think our
planet is one of many hot houses where
consciousness is being incubated but
it's not going to stay on this planet
it's going to migrate is going to move
it's going to go forward but in order to
make this jump we first have to grow up
we first have to come to terms with what
we are we have to stop thinking in terms
of this body this life and open
ourselves to the full depth and splendor
of the being that lies within we are I
think we are thank you beautiful does
that sound like a good place to end mark
it could have been a better segue in
this whole conversation to you know
tail off such
a deep and inspiring and
thought-provoking conversation for sure
so I thank you very much for that Chris
I look forward to meeting you in person
I look forward to hearing your talk at
the conference and your I'm looking
forward to it very much I'm looking
forward to that
that weekend it's kind of marvelous I
can't believe the wonderful people that
you've gathered for that weekend I'm
really important it's growing and and
it's just getting more and more popular
every day we're really excited to what
what's going to transform here for this
year's conference and you know it's just
exciting to be part of it
now and you know Chris I love to reach
out the invitation at some point to is
you know if you're interested in doing
more of these kind of conversations to
share some of your insights with people
you know I'm sure Stephen and I would be
happy to facilitate to do some things of
that nature as well because I heard
there's you know we've barely even
scratched the surface there's so much
talk about there with you that you know
I've got tons of questions myself but
I'm also kind of left here just a little
well when we gather in Vancouver then
maybe we can sit down and have some
conversations about where we might take
the future conversation excellent sense
do you have any projected publication
date for diamonds from heaven the the
forthcoming book it'll be out in the
second half of 2019 that's all I've been
able to get from the publisher so it
it's in the process so hopefully within
a year from now it'll be out all right
thank you very much and just oh no just
thank you it's you know it's amazing you
know I'm really amazed at the work
you've done and I'm really grateful
actually you know I mean it was very
difficult for you to go through that
process as you've made clear and you
know you've kind of done the work that
not a lot of people are going to do at
that level so you've brought back gems
to share and you know it's it's
wonderful thank you it's been an honor
it's a privilege and I'm really looking
forward to meeting both of you in person
so play quiet
thank okay that's too well until until
we see you in November second okay
you live your life awesome job blessings
good day bye bye hexagon gentlemen until
I'm stopping my camera